Good morning, everyone.
Please take a seat.
We're about ready to get started.
If you are in the overflow room,
we have plenty of room
still here in the main hall.
Probably the only time that's true today,
so come and take advantage of it.
So glad to see you all here this morning.
How many of you made it to
the community BOF last night?
You have a good time?
Get to meet some people,
learn a few things?
Excellent.
So as you can see, we got tired of having
Bill preaching at us from the aisles.
We decided to just bring him up on stage
and make it a lot easier on all of us.
So we're pleased to have Alex Cone
and Bill Bumgarner here from CodeFab.
These people between them probably
have a good fraction of the
WebObjects experience on the planet.
And so we're really pleased to have them
here about how to tune the last drop of
performance out of your applications.
Alex and Bill.
Thank you all for getting up at the
crack of dawn and getting down here.
I know next time we'll make sure that
this session is later in the day so
everyone can sleep in in the morning.
That's the first trick to optimizing is
make sure you get a good night's sleep.
Okay, so, you know, basically, you know,
this is about the good stuff.
You know, you've got an opportunity to do
killer high performance application.
This is when somebody wants to do the
big high transaction rate e-store that's
going to make a bazillion dollars.
And, you know,
this thing has actually got to work.
It's got to work well.
It's got to work well with a
lot of people doing a lot of
transactions through this thing.
And, you know, and in truth, you know,
you have to do a little bit of
thinking and planning before
you can get something that works
exactly the way you want it to,
to be ultra high performance
and ultra reliable,
ultra scalable, and so forth.
And we're going to try and give you
some good points on how to make a
WebObjects app that can take all that
punishment and make it look easy.
And we want to help you guys
build an application like
that and make it look easy.
Okay.
So, this is what you're going to learn.
How to do it leaner, meaner, faster,
nastier WebObjects applications
that will kick everyone's butt.
Most importantly, you know,
how to optimize them
before you build them.
And then, you know,
what to do when the application
turns out to be quite as
fast as you wanted it to be.
And how to get that last ounce
of performance out of it.
[Transcript missing]
You want to start from here?
Sure.
Okay, so one of the things is that with
optimization is you don't want to
optimize something before it works.
However,
there are some things you can do before
you start coding that will lead to an
application that is both relatively
optimal or at least passable as well
as something that can be optimized.
One of the philosophies we
work by is to make it work,
then make it work right,
and then make it fast.
And it's very important
to make it fast last.
A big mistake people make is trying to
optimize something before it exists.
In that,
what we're going to talk about is design,
what you can do in the design and in the
initial coding process to really lead to
an application or a server solution that
can be scaled and managed and extended.
In that, within that,
understand usage patterns.
You want to optimize the
most used areas first.
You really want to focus your
design around the areas that you
think the users are going to use.
If you're talking about a large site
and you have the budget to do it,
do some use testing.
Do some focus testing where you
take some--your potential user
audience and run them through the
designs and get their feedback.
There's companies out there that do this.
The other thing is make
your entry page fast.
One of the things you'll see on the web,
especially when you get nailed
down by the slash.factory,
you get touted in AOL or
something like that,
is that you'll get hundreds and
hundreds of users that will hit
your entry page and go no deeper.
Kind of depressing but it's the reality.
To that end, one of the things that
Dave Newman mentioned in
his security thing yesterday
which was very interesting.
If you're talking about a site--well,
not even a site where there's
logins but in general,
if you're talking about a site where
you don't need to create a user session
when the user hits the entry page,
you can avoid a tremendous amount
of overhead by not creating an
individual user session when
the user hits that entry page.
That can be a great boon to performance.
Plan your business logic
around response generation.
One of the things we commonly find
ourselves doing is we're building back
end applications like entry tools,
etc.
And while those are more complex,
what you really want to do is
design your business logic about
how the front is going to be used.
You want to avoid repeating
expensive calculations.
Use caching.
Just avoid the expensive ones altogether.
Use less precision.
Don't provide as much information.
Or provide user interfaces where if the
user wants the expensive information,
they have to drill down a little bit.
They have to ask for it.
Retain and reuse data.
Know when it is out of date.
That's a huge issue.
There's a caching session,
EOF caching session.
I recommend everyone go to that.
And manage your cached data carefully.
This is a huge issue as well.
Think carefully about how often you
really need to refresh that data and
how you're going to go about doing that.
One common mistake is invalidating
your cache simultaneously across all
your applications so every single app
hits the database at the same time.
Bad idea.
You also want to minimize
your memory footprint.
By doing that,
you can run more instances,
which gives you more opportunity
for scaling by spreading your
traffic out across instances.
Share data across your sessions.
What that means is when
the application starts up,
you pre-cache information.
You want to clean up thoroughly,
and you want to clear transient instance
variables when no longer needed.
What that means is that if
you're doing Java programming,
just because you have
a garbage collector,
don't be a lazy programmer.
When you're done with something,
set the pointers to null.
Not pointers, set the variables to null.
That will, not only will that
make your code cleaner,
it also means that you're going to
avoid issues like using a variable that
you really didn't mean to use anymore.
It also means that when the
garbage collector does run,
it has less of an object
graph to traverse.
Use stateless components.
Stateless component is a component
that literally has no state within it.
It's cached by the application,
not by the session.
Use shared sessions if appropriate.
If you're talking about a news site,
maybe you don't need
user sessions at all.
And set the session timeout
value to something appropriate.
You don't want these things
sitting on your server forever.
You want to plan your data access,
your queries caching, cache updating.
And understand your data latency.
You really want to try for zero requests,
or zero data requests per response.
Now, obviously, you can't do that.
You're never going to achieve
zero or else your app's never
going to display anything.
But you really want to minimize those,
because if you can minimize
the trips to the database,
you can really increase
app response time.
It also leads to better scaling.
If you have fewer applications talking
to the database simultaneously as
you hit that huge flood of traffic,
if you're doing your caching and you're
sharing that data across sessions,
you can increase your scalability.
Because as your traffic peaks,
you don't have sudden bursts of
activity against your database.
Use in-memory searches where possible.
Obviously,
any time you can avoid traffic across
the network in your server environment,
you're going to get a
huge boost in efficiency.
You want to manage your faulting
and manage your caching.
Again, this is just about making
sure your data is up to date.
At the same time,
making sure you're not expending
huge amounts of processor time,
network bandwidth, et cetera,
updating these caches.
And use the shared editing
context for reference data.
There's a shared editing context
functionality that was new in 4.5.
This allows you to relatively
easily share data across sessions.
If you've got to go to the database
and read the upcoming calendar events,
every session doesn't
need a copy of that.
You can use time outside your
request-response loop for housekeeping,
or you can manage the time with which
you're doing the housekeeping in the
request-response loop very carefully.
For example, you can load reference data
at the application startup.
Instead of forcing the first
person to hit the site to refresh
your caches or fill your caches,
use the application "will
finish launching" notification
to pre-fill those caches.
You can use timers or perform
after delay to do database access
or to do cache invalidation,
cache updating, etc.
You've got to be a little careful with
that because of the way WebObjects
works and the way threading works.
You can end up with a thread issue.
But there's discussions of that on
the Omni group mailing list which
everyone should be subscribed to.
I'm going to try to keep this high level.
Serialize and lock request handling.
That's very important.
And this is when you get into really
advanced WebObjects programming
and you start doing things like
multi-threaded cache updates,
cache invalidation,
or the timers is what you want
to do is you want to make sure,
and this is kind of a warning,
we have scars.
You want to make sure that you're locking
your request handling when you're in
situations where your caches are being
updated because you could find yourself
in multi-threaded situations that can
lead to some serious data destruction.
And these are, again,
things that have been discussed
on the OmniWeb list and we'll
not really go into them.
You want to partition your functionality
into multiple applications.
One of the temptations with
WebObjects is and with the ease with
which it is to add functionality to
applications is to make a monolithic
application that just does everything.
And part of it there is
that it's very convenient.
If you have a single session
for the user and that session
contains everything in the world,
then it's very efficient.
Well, yes it is,
but at the same time it also
greatly limits your scalability.
If you talk about spreading the
user session across multiple
applications such as the user,
say, comes into your site and browses,
that's a different application than, say,
drilling down into a
product or doing searches.
What this means is that you have much
greater opportunities for scalability.
If you need to, if the search tool proves
to be a bottleneck,
you can just run more of them
versus having to run more of
your monolithic application.
Move more expensive operations
from live site to data entry?
That's just about building
administration tools.
Think about when you're
building larger sites,
building a front-end
application that the user sees.
It's all optimized and
oriented to performance.
Building a back-end application,
which is what the administrators see,
which is optimized to flexibility and
power in manipulating the business.
By doing that,
you can move your expensive
operations into the back-end.
If you're doing something like storing
images off on the server and you keep
track of information like how big
the images are and things like that,
or you've got to do other sorts
of processing that's necessary to
prepare the user interface for the
person visiting your site to see,
move those calculations
to the data entry time.
When I upload the image,
let's calculate what the height and
width of the image is and store that
information in the database rather
than grabbing that at run time.
There's a variety of things like that.
If you can compose it in a
way that's more efficient,
it's going to be a lot easier to do.
You can compose images by compositing
and store them when you enter
the data rather than when the
user comes to view the data,
you can save time.
If you construct cached HTML pages
when you're doing the data entry and
thus have information pre-digested
ready for the site to work.
You've got a small number of
people using the administrative
application relatively infrequently.
You can move functionality from
presentation time to data entry time
that will significantly increase the
speed of your presentation time tool,
which is actually the thing
that your speed is all about.
Nobody really cares if the
admin tool is fast or not.
I mean, yes,
they'll complain a little bit if it
takes too long to save something,
but the real throughput that
you're looking to optimize is
the thing that the customers see.
One of the real benefits of the
WebObjects environment is the
ease with which you can create
modules and you can assemble these
modules and put them all together.
That's really the last three points here.
One of the things you can do
is create a different view.
You can create a different view
of your data for the front end
application versus the back end.
If the front end application
is primarily read only,
which generally they are, I mean,
if you're in a store,
it's not like the customer
can edit the price.
So if that's the case,
then the front end application doesn't
need to have the business logic
or the expense of supporting that.
So you can create an EO model
or say two EO models.
One that has a very simple view of the
data that's optimized for speed and a
second EO model that's used by the entry
tool application or the administration
application suite that is optimized
to the functionality and the power
required by the business managers.
And all of this can be
leveraged through frameworks.
Generally, what we're finding is that our
applications end up being extremely thin.
There'll be almost no code in
the applications themselves.
All they do is load a
bunch of frameworks.
Everything is in the frameworks.
And by doing that,
you can reuse those frameworks
across as many applications as
you need to realize the site.
We have minimize use of
frames and user interface.
It's just an optimization,
I mean clearly frames are necessary,
frames are necessary,
but frames can cause a lot of issues,
they can cause a lot of extra
traffic against your site.
As well when you're doing dynamic
applications where you have to update
content across multiple frames,
you'll find situations where you end
up having to reload the whole page,
which means you get one
hit to load the frame set,
one hit to load each frame
and that can be very,
very expensive.
It also means that when those
hits for the frames come in,
the browser, it can lead to a lot of
bugs because the browser,
you don't know what order the browser
is going to load the frames in.
And it's going to load both
of them simultaneously,
whichever one gets there first is
going to be the first one to load.
And if the user hits the stop button,
then okay, one frame loaded,
the other one didn't, how do you know?
You don't.
So that can just be a
lot of confusion there.
Use direct options wherever you can.
Direct actions are wonderful.
Not only do they allow for bookmarkable
sections within your application,
they can also be very,
very fast because they don't go through
the full request response handling.
They don't have to do form
processing or things like that.
You can certainly use form
values with request stack,
with the direct action request handler,
but you don't have to.
And beware of mixing
Java and Objective-C.
Yes, certainly the environment does
support fully mixing these things
in just about any way you want to.
There are a couple of little subtle
limitations you can run into.
However,
there are some serious performance
issues with going across
that bridge between Java and
Objective-C and it should be avoided.
It's also very difficult to debug.
Okay, so I'm going to turn it
back over to Alex here.
Okay.
So those are some good
pointers just sort of up front.
Think about when you're
structuring your application,
you're taking apart your problem
and figuring out how am I going
to go about building a solution.
We organize things well,
we do some good planning
about database access,
and do some good planning about caching
of our data in order to minimize
our round trips to the database,
and we've thought through our
framework design and everything else.
And the app's done and
it's up and running,
but okay, you know, it's a bit of a pig.
You know, let's assume maybe the opposite
situation is you've inherited a
pig that somebody else has built,
and now it's time to figure
out a way to make that pig fly.
So this is, you know,
all the planning up front
is all well and good,
but as we all know that, you know,
no good plan survives contact with,
you know, the enemy or reality or your
customers and what have you.
You know,
there's just a limit to how much
you can get right planning up front.
You get halfway through this thing
and the design changes remarkably or
your client calls you up and says,
"Look,
our business model has changed." And,
you know,
so it doesn't always end up working
out by the time you get the app
written that it's exactly the way
you thought when you started out.
So, okay, so it's a pig.
It's a little too slow, you know,
it sucks more memory, you know,
you're like, "Damn,
that's a big application instance size,
isn't it?
Fifty megabytes and nobody's even
started a session yet." You know,
you go off and do this
request and it's like,
"It's on my machine and that's
two seconds before it even started
loading the browser." You know,
you're testing this out with a hundred
users and the CPUs on your multiprocessor
son are pegged and it's like,
"Wow." All right, now what do you do?
Okay.
First of all, don't be silly.
All right, you know,
this seems like trivial advice
here but this is actually good.
We've had some situations where
we've had clients who got stuck with,
you know,
they had woke caching enabled turned off,
you know, for debugging purposes.
And, you know, they're like, "Oh,
I'm not sure what I'm doing.
I'm just going to do this." You know,
they managed to get into
production with the big sites
on and caching was turned off.
So every time somebody loaded
any WebObjects component,
it reloaded it from disk.
In fact, there's a particular
client I'm thinking of,
you know, I had actually coded into
the code for the application
to turn this off explicitly.
In eight places.
And so, you know, everybody kept saying,
"Ah, I found it," you know,
and they take this line out and
it would still be--still suck.
All right.
But, you know,
[Transcript missing]
When you got to do some fetching,
let's optimize this a bit.
It seems obvious but it's
definitely a good thing.
If you've got pop ups,
you've got reference data,
you've got stuff that is constant
across everybody's stuff,
fetch it at the application level in a
shared editing context and keep it there.
It's really easy to start coding up
using the default editing context for
a session and start doing stuff there.
You can end up with copies of data in
every session and every editing context
and you just don't need to do that.
Use the session's editing context only,
and I mean only,
for data that the session's
user will actually edit.
If he's not actually
changing the values in it,
you can share the data
with everybody else.
You can have a session
specific list of things I'm
interested in or what have you,
but it doesn't mean you need a session
specific copy of the actual data.
That's just a general good rule of thumb.
Is the user just going to use
the data that's in the session?
Is the user just going to edit
this piece of data in his session?
No, then we don't need it in
the session editing context.
Okay,
you get to the stage where you want to
avoid doing fetches in order to draw
the pages that the user is looking at.
A good idea is to cache and share
data that's used to draw the pages
that the users are looking at and try
to keep that cached data up to date.
You end up with a situation,
like we've done some financial sites
where people are putting in bids and
offers and doing trades and such,
so that session A, app instance A,
is going to put some data
into the database that
everybody else needs to see.
You need to find a good way to make
sure that everybody's information
is up to date in a timely fashion.
There's some really neat stuff for,
you can do inter-application
messaging so that the individual
applications don't have to fetch
from the database every time.
There was some good work that
Dave Newman posted originally
on doing snapshot updating.
We've done a bunch of
stuff to modify that stuff,
but that just avoids you having to go
to the database to update your data.
You can also use the time
between request response loops.
We mentioned up in the design session,
you can just, when nobody is actually
requesting something,
go in and do a fetch and
update the cached data.
That's a little less efficient
than notifying the various app
instances that the data has changed,
but net-net, when it comes time to handle
a request for a response,
you know you've got up-to-date data.
You know you've got up-to-date
data in your application.
You don't have to go to the database.
Of course, if you've got to get some
sort of non-object based
data out of the database,
go ahead and use the raw row stuff.
It's quite fast and doesn't
involve instantiating objects.
Don't try and get around the whole
object mechanism using this stuff,
but if you want to know if there have
been any changes to the database with,
in this particular time
frame where you want to,
you know,
you can use raw rows for certain
specialized stuff and it's quite fast.
All right.
The thing that really
bites you in the butt is,
you know, you have this picture of what
the application is doing.
And, you know,
you think it's being very efficient
because you optimized the design
before you wrote the whole thing.
And it's still slow and the
database is still cranking away.
So, you know,
obviously you're doing fetching where
you didn't expect to do fetching.
So EO-adapter debug
enabled is your friend.
You know, turn this on and you'll see all
the SQL that's being generated.
You go to this page and
you think there's no SQL,
no queries involved in this page.
And you go hit this page,
it's like query, query, query, query,
query, query, query, query, query, query,
query, process, process, process.
You're like,
where's this all coming from?
And, you know,
it's very easy to discover that,
you know,
in your WAD file you're referencing
object.relationship.relationship.value.
And, you know,
you're smart caching where you
preloaded the data up front.
You didn't use any prefetching
or anything else like that.
And the data on the other end of these
relationships hasn't been fetched yet.
And so you go to visit the page and
you've got some binding here and that
forces several fetches in order to
get the data to answer the binding.
You know, especially bad is when
you're just saying,
you know,
you're like testing to see whether or
not we should show this component or not.
You know, does this object have,
you know, one of these things on the
end of this relationship?
And so you fault in the
relationship only to find out,
no, it doesn't have anything and you're
not going to display anything anyway.
So be very careful about, you know,
what you bind to and how you
answer some of these questions.
This actually raises an interesting
point about WebObjects in general.
I know virtually nothing about databases.
I'm lost in when I hit
a relational database.
You give me a raw SQL window,
I don't know what to do.
But with EOModeler, even I can set up a
really complex database,
generate it, use it,
and do very useful things.
Of course, I can't make it go fast.
I mean, the power of these tools
can be intoxicating.
It can lead you to some trouble.
And these things here, you know,
using the adapter debug enable,
looking at the database plans,
things like that is critical.
Because it's very likely you're going
to have someone on the project like
me who can make the thing work at the
object level and is going to realize an
application that's just going to be a
pig in production at the database level.
So, yeah,
there you are cleaning up after the pig.
But one of the good things you can
do to avoid excess faulting is,
when we were talking before about
having separate data models for
data entry and data display,
you can have instances of, you know,
like the product that you're going
to display on the screen or whatever,
the article that you're going to
display on this article page that you've
tuned for the runtime application,
and you do things like
flatten relationships in.
And so, you know,
testing to see if you have a picture,
and if the article has a picture,
then we need to put it in the
picture component or what have you.
If it's been flattened in, you know,
we can check the value
without causing faulting.
If you have this thing
as a separate relation,
you know, article.image,
in order to say if article.image
is not equal to null,
you have to fire a fault.
So you can optimize your
fetching behavior by tuning
the EO model and flattening
relationships in for presentation.
One of the most common mistakes
that we've had to clean up,
I'm sure none of you would do this,
you're all very good,
is you're building the
components up one at a time,
and you think, oh, this component,
I'm going to need this pop-up
list of all the states in it,
and the country.
And so, like in your init method,
you write a little thing in there
that does a fetch of all the states,
all objects,
so that you can populate the pop-up.
Because, you know,
you're just writing this one
component at this moment,
you're not thinking about it.
And, you know,
six other developers on the project for
six other pages that have a list of all
the states also write the same thing.
And so every time these
components are initialized,
they go off and do the database
and fetch this stuff in.
And components come out of the cache,
and then they are recreated,
and they fetch in,
and components are cached
in different sessions.
And each one in its init is
fetching in this list of 50 states.
You only need one copy.
It's not like the states
change all that often.
You know, you go through and you
clean all this stuff up,
and you move this stuff
off to application in the
shared editing context.
Everybody's got a pop-up or
browsers or things like that,
you know, valid regions that we ship to,
so on and so forth,
can get this common reference
data out of one place,
and not try and do this
stuff on each thing.
If need be, you know,
fetch all the units.
You can fetch, you know,
all the objects you need,
and then you can use filtering, you know,
to produce the stuff that you
need for each individual page.
The other common mistake that
involves excess fetching is,
okay, you've got this, you know,
you've got this thing in
the shared editing context,
and, you know,
you accidentally cause stuff to be
fetched into the sessions editing
context by sort of not managing,
you know, which objects are in
which editing context.
You know, if you must, you know, if you,
you know,
you've got to the point where the
user's going to edit some object,
and you use local instance of object,
you know, to get local copies of the
object without doing faulting.
I mean, basically without going to
the database to get this.
You know, basically it's creating a new
instance of the snapshot data
in a particular editing context,
and doesn't require round
trip to the database.
So you carefully manage when you
move things across the boundary
between the shared editing context
and the sessions editing context.
And, you know,
follow this stuff all around.
Have a policy.
You know, these objects are all here.
We'll only have this object
when we do this or whatever.
And, you know, stick to it,
and that'll soup things up a bunch.
Okay, optimize your EO models.
Again, there's a tendency to go
batshit on your EO model or
come up with like the perfect,
you know, normalized abstracted EO model
with everything as an object
and so on and so forth.
I mean, you know,
we had one client who had, you know,
who had a table for gender objects
with a row for male and a row for
female so that they could have all the
people who'd signed up for their site,
you know, have a reference to either the
male object or the female object.
You know, it's like, oh, please,
you know, use flags.
You know,
simplify some of this stuff down.
It may not make everything an object,
but, you know, they were faulting these
things in all over the place.
And it was like, no.
Okay, the other cool thing
is EOF and inheritance.
It's cool.
You can do just amazing things with this.
And I know I've been given the, you know,
EOF inheritance abuse award a few times.
You know, think seriously about,
you know,
how much of the inheritance stuff you
absolutely need to have in your model.
You know, if worst comes to worst,
you can do a complex hierarchy
for your editorial tool and
simplify it for your application.
But there are a lot of cases in which
having a complex inheritance hierarchy,
especially when you're
doing deep fetches,
which is, you know,
I've got 15 types of users and
I want to select all users who
haven't been here since last week.
And I've got to do a fetch
against each one of the 15 tables.
Even when you're doing something
like single table inheritance,
it's going to do, you know,
fetch against table
A where flag equals one,
A where flag equals two.
Each round trip is expensive.
What you're trying to minimize is
not the data that's pulled across,
but the actual number of round
trips to the data server.
And so the complexity of
your inheritance hierarchy,
especially when you're
using deep fetches,
can cause a lot of round
trips to the data server.
This again brings up another
point where a person like me
can get you in a lot of trouble.
I think in objects.
You know, I look at a bunch of
users and I think a big,
you know, an inheritance hierarchy, yeah,
that makes total sense.
But EOF provides a brilliant
object-oriented interface
to a relational database.
And a relational database
doesn't do inheritance well.
The data-oriented databases do,
but there are other issues there.
So keep the object model simple,
not because the object
model being simple is great,
but because it's going to make
the database that much faster.
And you can overload these tables too.
I mean,
you can have complex objects that you
use for editing and then slap over on top
of the same table a simplified object,
maybe with flattened
attributes and what have you,
that you use for presentation.
You know, maybe we're doing on this
page some simple piece of
information processing and,
you know, we can take a, you know,
create a new user entity that, you know,
spans the important shared part
of all the other user entities and
we'll just do a query against that.
And it doesn't give us the
whole complex hierarchy,
but it gives us enough information to
answer the questions that we need to do.
And it's only, it doesn't have an
inheritance hierarchy at all.
You know,
there's tricks you can play like
that that will simplify things.
You know, again, you know,
think about what you're going
to use these things for.
Use batch faulting where appropriate.
You know, you can basically,
you're using,
what this does is you sit there
and you set batch faulting in
your EO model to say when you're
going to fetch this object,
why don't you fetch the next
10 because we might need them.
Basically what you're doing
is you're pre-populating the
cache that's stored by EOF,
the snapshot dictionary of your objects.
But then you need to make sure that
you're using that appropriately.
If you've got two one relationships
in the same editing context and the
object on the other side of the object,
you're going to need to make sure
that you're using that appropriately.
If you've got two one relationships
in the object on the other side
of the two one relationship
is already in your cache,
it'll go find that without
faulting the database.
But, you know, it's not going to,
you know,
if you've got a too many relationship,
it's going to have to go
to the database anyway.
I can't tell that it's got, you know,
all the children in there for
the parent because even though,
you know, you know and I know that,
you know,
all three children have already been
brought into the snapshot dictionary,
you know, it doesn't really have anything
that can tell to make sure that the,
you know, the list is complete.
So it has to go to the database
even if the result of this is
that it can satisfy the too many
relationship out of the cache.
You know, use prefetching.
This is, you know,
this is transmogrified from the
earlier days to the current days from,
you know, hints to actual directives.
And you can just say when you're
going to populate this object,
you know, populate these things
on the relationship.
This is useful for when you're building
up your cache to make sure that later
when people start using the objects and
following the relationships to things,
the objects on the other end of
the relationship are already there.
And just, you know,
beware of excess complexity
in your model in general.
You end up with extra pointers
to various objects in there that
can then cause further fetching
activities or in certain cases,
excess back pointers can
prevent prefetching from working
the way it's supposed to.
So once you set up all this prefetching,
you got to actually watch the stuff
with adapter debug enabled to make
sure that the right objects are
being fetched when you expect it to.
All right.
So EOF does all this great stuff for you.
It'll build your tables.
It'll build your database.
So on and so forth.
You know, really nice stuff.
The one thing it doesn't
do for you out of the box,
it doesn't create indexes.
All right.
You've gone off and you've
created all these objects
that have unique primary keys.
You're doing all this fetching
based on unique primary keys.
Create indexes on those things.
Also look at your queries
and see what you're doing.
People are doing these sort of
queries where they've got fields they
can type in values and do a search.
What are they searching on?
Create indexes on those values.
You can speed up your database
activity tremendously by,
you know, properly indexing things.
If you're not quite sure how
the database is using stuff,
this is a great thing.
Everybody who's not like a database
geek doesn't know about this,
but this is a database
propeller head thing,
you know, for sure.
You know, Sybase is show plan in Oracle.
It's explain plan.
You turn this on and run your query,
and it says, "Well, you know,
I was going to check in
this table and that table,
and then I was going to
gather this information here,
and then I was going to process it and
do that stuff there." And it tells you
exactly how it's going to go about giving
you back the three rows of data you would
actually get from your complex query.
And one of the useful things
this will tell you is,
you know, and then since you asked the
question in just this way,
I decided not to use your
index and to do a table scan
instead to get the results out.
And, you know,
by sort of doing explain plan,
fiddling with your
indexes and what have you,
you're going to actually make sure the
database is doing what you want it to do,
not what it thinks it
has to be able to do.
I've got plenty of time.
Yeah, we can go over.
It was a two-hour session, right?
Okay, no problem.
No, we're getting close to the end.
Other good tuning thing is, you know,
the database is running exactly
the way it's supposed to.
It puts most of the information
that you're going to access on a
regular basis into memory cache,
and you can check that with the
database statistics to find out,
is it doing that or is it going to
the disk every time for your data,
and you can tune that.
And also just more silliness,
and you may have to get somebody to use
a database with to come in and do some,
you know, tuning in the operating system.
If you've got a multiprocessor machine,
oftentimes you have to actually tell
the database to use all the processors.
Similarly, databases often have a
bunch of parameters about
how much memory they use,
you know,
how much data they put in there,
how much stored procedures
they put into memory.
Tune that appropriately because
you're going to have this big piece
of iron that's basically sitting
there idle because the database
is trying to run a little tiny
slice of memory on one processor,
and it doesn't do anyone any good.
Speaking from experience,
databases run really,
really slow when they're tuned for, say,
512 megs of RAM, but you only have 256.
So, you know,
it's a little bit of a challenge.
[Transcript missing]
Refactor your software.
Once you get the thing built,
once it's working right,
And you've found where
your bottlenecks are,
start to, you know, compile anything that
does serious calculations.
Look at optimizing your
calculation engines.
Look at generalizing that and moving
it out of sort of the application
layer and into the backend layer.
And really treat it like a serious
calculation engine that you want
to maximize performance of and
then use it from the upper layers.
Simplify your application
and session objects.
This is more,
this isn't really about optimization
as much as facilitating optimization.
What you want to do is if you have, say,
something that does region management,
going back to the store thing
where you've got multiple regions,
at the application level
and there's some complex,
say, product selection or product
availability on regions.
As an example, we did a record store.
Record stores,
there's certain records you can't sell
in certain countries in the world.
So we have a region manager.
We push that region manager into
an object of its own that you can
access through the application.
By doing that,
it moves that functionality out
of the application level and it
means that as we're optimizing that
and we're optimizing other things,
we're modifying something
that's relatively isolated.
And finally,
don't forget about the web server.
Is the web server optimized
for the environment?
A classic example of this is, okay,
so you're running against Apache.
You've got that WebObjects
adapter in there.
You've tuned your application
out to the nth degree.
Oops,
you're only running five Apache servers.
I did that once.
Tune it.
Make sure it has the appropriate
configuration for the amount
of load you expect to have.
Use a mixture of your
static and dynamic content.
Wherever you can use static content,
again,
that's just going to boost performance.
Direct actions allow you to integrate the
static content with the dynamic content.
If you enable, okay, in WebObjects,
one of the great things about HTTP,
since it's totally stateless,
is that when you have a user having
a user experience with your site,
you have to pass around a user ID,
a session identifier.
Well, normally, by default,
that session identifier goes back
and forth in every single URL.
So every time a hyperlink is
generated in the dynamic content,
that hyperlink has to have this big,
long,
nasty number that identifies that user
such that when the user clicks on that,
WebObjects can figure out what
session to associate that hit with.
Well, if you move that to the cookie,
you know,
cookies have their own problems,
but pretty much they're
supported everywhere now.
By doing that,
pretty much all the URLs in your
content no longer have to have
user-specific information in them.
This allows you to integrate your
dynamic content and your static content.
So, for example, again,
using a record store example,
we may have static pages
that describe albums,
static pages that describe artists.
Well, those don't change very often.
Leave them on disk as static.
Let the WebObjects application
navigate over to them,
have direct actions in those
pages that bring the users back
into the WebObjects application.
The more hits you can get
against the static stuff,
the more off you are.
I'm going to move quickly and do some QA.
Okay.
Well, we actually--do we have
10 minutes after to do QA?
Fifteen.
Great.
Thank you.
Optimize for fast browser display.
This is another little war story here.
We had a client and
the content generation,
the content delivery was really,
really slow.
And this was back in the days when tables
didn't really quite work right and you
couldn't really specify image sizes.
So, we had to do a lot of customizing.
We had to do a lot of customizing.
We had
Smaller pages display faster.
The less HTML you generate,
the faster it goes out.
The less dynamic content
you're generating,
the faster it goes out.
You want to batch your
displays along sets of data.
Not only does the user not want
to see 3,000 products all at once,
this makes things go faster.
Show them 10 at a time,
show them 15 at a time.
Generate short URLs.
This again gets back to
the spacer.gif thing.
Instead of /images, use /i.
This also do better with images
and just everything surrounding
the static resources that are
associated with every website.
Split installs and WebObjects are very,
very convenient.
They're very useful.
We never do them.
And it's not because they don't
work or anything like that.
We never do them because we put all of
our static resources as close to the
top level of the web server as we can.
We leave it there and it reduces
the amount of HTML we generate.
You want to also improve
the structure of your HTML.
Now, this isn't as much as an
optim... This is optimization,
as in optimizing towards
a working application,
not a fast one.
Use an HTML code checker,
such as WebLint,
which everyone should be on the
WebObjects mailing list at OmniGroup,
www.omnigroup.com.
If you're ever planning on doing
any development with WebObjects
or you're even interested,
immediately sign up for that list.
And the reason why I mention that
as well is because we're going to be
throwing a bunch of code out there next
week when we get a chance to go back.
And one of them is this
thing called WebLint.
What it does is it looks through your
WebObjects HTML or your generated HTML,
checks the structure of it,
makes sure everything lines up...
Simplify your table structures.
It's tempting to nest tables
deeper and deeper and deeper,
especially when you have an object
hierarchy or a component hierarchy.
You want to reuse all those components.
Every component needs to guarantee
that it displays correctly so
it has its own little table.
That's really slow.
It's really, really slow in Netscape.
It's just very slow in Internet Explorer.
And watch for nesting problems.
especially things like nested forms.
If you open a tag,
don't close the tag until you've
closed every other tag inside of it.
And always make sure you close the tag.
In the HTML standard that
seemed to have come out of the
early browser implementations,
closing a table cell,
closing a table row,
even closing a table,
closing forms was pretty much optional.
That doesn't work when you're talking
about dynamic content generation.
And it's gonna break things.
And also,
when it gets back to actual performance,
one of the risks there,
especially if you have forms
that are mis-structured,
is that you can get incomplete
data back to your application,
or you can get broken data.
And you can get a performance
hit as your application goes in,
oops, exception,
and has to go and deal with maintenance
stuff associated with an error
condition or an exceptional state.
The classic one is the overlap problem.
I can't tell you how many times
we've worked with HTML producers
or we have been doing the
HTML ourselves and just a simple
HTML overlap where you open a form,
you open the table,
then you close the form
and close the table.
There's a problem there.
And this can cause some serious problems.
The forms don't work.
The processing must be broken.
The code must be broken.
It's like, no, it's actually in the HTML.
And one of the things to keep in mind is
that especially when you're a developer,
you focus on a single component.
I'm doing this component.
Well, sometimes problems can span
across multiple components.
And what we like to do is we check,
we use WebLint on the components
themselves as well as on the
entire generated content.
And for more information,
this here as well,
please sign up to the OmniWeb,
OmniGroup mailing list and there will
be a lot more information coming out.
After WWDC, there's always discussions
on the mailing list,
follows up from the sessions, etc.
I'm sure Dave Newman who's making
a bunch of code available will
post information there as well.
Dave Newman: All right.
Well, we hope this stuff was, you know,
was a good start.
I hope this was a good start at
optimizing your applications.
We've got some time for
a whole bunch of QA.
Now, the usual who to contact.
Let's do a little question and answer.
First of all,
a big hand for our presenters.